Well,
Roger Revell came out to Pearl Harbor and he
couldn't buy any shoes because he wore a 14 size and
his toes were flapping out. Unfortunately, he got
a case of cold one day and had to go to bed so I could
get his shoes sewed up. And during those two hours
while he was in bed and I was waiting for the shoes,
he talked to me about oceanography. Were you in the
Navy then? But actually, it goes much further back
than that. My father's people are from the coast of
St. Simons, Georgia. And I always wanted to get to
the coast, with my mother being an artist like the
mountains. So I was trying to get to the coast. And
finally, when I went into the Navy as an enlisted
man, I was thrown out for being colorblind. After a
month in the dispensary, the chief showed me a
manual of a thing called a bathy thermograph. He
said, well, you know a little bit about sonar. Why
don't you go up to Woods Hole? Maybe they'll give
you a better job. August 23rd, 1941 was an awful hot
day. The Atlantis was getting ready to go on a
cruise. I sent my regards to the South Carolina
Power Company and started in as a technician on
Ewing's project up there. Then I went into the
Navy, as the tape tells, as the BT tape tells, and
rode herd on the Bath and Thermograph boys. all
through Bikini. At the end of that time, probably
really urged on by Roger Revelle and another talk
I'd had with Ray Montgomery, I took the GI Bill of
Rights and went to Scripps, and they let me in under
the door. What was Maurice Ewing like? If you
haven't read the November 4, 11, and 18 New Yorker
of 1974 profiles, you have missed a gem of a
description of the explosion of oceanography and
the earth sciences largely due to this great
genius. Morris Ewing was the most, he was a genius.
One of the few I ever met. He could be as homely as an
old shoe, tell you a joke right out of the Big Bend
area or any part of Texas. But at the same time, when
it came to knowing what he wanted to do, he had the
gift. of making the right choice. I'll never
forget a lesson. On an Atlantis cruise, we went
across one of the canyons. I thought I'd noticed a
change in the temperature structure. While I was
sitting there thinking about it, of course, we
were miles down the road. Ewing came to me and said,
King, next time you get in an occasion like that,
don't think Just take the data. Take more and more
and more and more as fast as you can and figure it out
afterwards. A lesson I never forgot. I once asked
him, how do you know how to start a project? What is
the most important thing? How do you pick it out?
And he said, well, King, if the time ever comes when
I think it's necessary to my project to count the
rivets on the Atlantis deck, I'll count the rivets
on the Atlantis deck. But therein lay his genius
and that intuitive... choice of the main aim. And
he never was looking just at the day, as you know,
with the seismographs on the moon and all that. He
was always way ahead of his time. And I think one of
the most engaging things about him was his common
real delight in the discoveries that were being
made. It was my good fortune to spend one night
there with him, Joe Warzel, John Ewing and his wife
at Lamont's, at the house there, Ewing and Lamont.
We just sat around and talked about things. And
he'd say things like this. He said, well, I don't
know if we want to change this or that. You know,
we've got a ship now. And if something interesting
is happening, we can send somebody there to look at
it. Just the commonplace, common sense approach
to everything that he did. He has, as the New York
article brings out so well, he was fundamentally a
teacher. That was his dream, that was his love. The
story is told, perhaps part from the time he was, I
believe, with, was it Lehigh? That someone said,
you're flunking too many of your students. He
said, well, suppose I could get an outstanding PhD
for each year. for this university that I teach.
Oh, that would be wonderful, they said. He said,
all right. I'm going to talk then at the level of the
best student I have in the class. And the rest of
them, if you don't mind, I'll just throw the books
down the stairs and grade them according to where
they land. Of course, he wasn't that trash. But as a
teacher, as a person able to explain a thing in
simple terms, and that enthusiasm, they brought
in the first from Africa, off the African coast,
the first records. I was at Lamont one day when they
came in by special courier. They spread them out on
the table and John and Bruce, who they were very
friendly at that time, and Ewing went bemused from
record to record. Hazel would say, yes, I found it a
thousand miles northeast of there, so here it is
here again. And Ewing showed me his own sketch and
plot of the distribution of manganese nodules
from Panama to Hawaii as it came in from all the data
that they had, and he'd already come to the
conclusion of how they increased with distance
and along that course.
He was always overworked, always tired, but
always... approachable. He'd come to
Washington, didn't wear a hat. You'd see his hair
above all the crowd, admirals and others on the
streets in those days. He'd walk in with that calm
smile, and he'd take us all to the Cosmos Club, and
when the cupids on the ceiling began to dance, we
knew we'd had enough to drink.
Now, you were in Woods Hole? Yes, that's where I
first met him. And he was, at that time, They had
built about 15 bathy thermographs in the shop, and
they were beginning to survey the... They had the
idea of putting them on ships and surveying the
waters of the North Atlantic. Then the war broke
out right in the middle of that program. But he was
already there in 1940, early 41. And
there's a very, very important report of Woods
Hole called... underwater sound in seawater that
came out and reprinted in 42 that should be a part of
this record. I once asked him where he got the basic
sound velocity data calibrations. He showed me a
Navy notebook in which there must have been 500
handwritten calculations based on the
temperatures that he'd found. And he said, here's
where I established it. I was always trying to make
him do something about sound velocity in the sea
after those days. I said, when are you going to make
it more precise? He said, when I find it in the
affairs of my work. Of course, his development
with Luskin, he was really head of the project, but
Luskin did the work with the manufacturers. The
precision depth recorder was a milestone in
getting the precision of timing it to 1.2 million
which was unheard of in those days, and took out the
variability due to the swing of the ship's
generator and the sound velocity, and therefore
the distance measurements to the bottom. Did you
stay at Woods Hole until 1945? No, I was at Woods
Hole for eight months from 1943, August 1941, to
February 1942, They gave me a wave on my eyes and
took me back in the Navy as a junior grade
lieutenant, the fastest promotion in history.
And what were your duties in the Navy? During the
first eight months at the Bureau of Ships, I rode
herds on the manufacture of bathy thermographs
with the big contractors like the Waterbury and
the Submarine Signal Company. It was purely
administrative work on contracts. And as I've
said elsewhere, the important fact in this case is
that the bathy thermograph was considered by the
Navy a component of sonar equipment and therefore
was never under the restriction of just
scientific instruments. It was bought as a
device. And that's the way Morris Ewing looked at
it too. He did not look at it as a precision
instrument. And all the money that's been spent on
trying to make a bathy thermograph record
accurately, quote unquote, has always amused me
because what he wanted was a relative profile, the
relative changes, those breaks in the trace which
indicated where the things were, rather than the
exact temperature at a given spot in time as you get
with a reversion thermometer or something of that
kind. Did you know Athelston Spellhouse? Yes, he
was, I knew him later in Washington, and of course I
was at his original Sea Grant dissertation up in
Rhode Island when he launched that program. But I
met him, and the bathy thermograph paper of
Lafon's and mine are based on papers and stories I
got from him personally.
Was it your impression he ever approached the idea
of the BT being an exact measuring device? No, I
don't think so.
When you were with the Bureau of Ships, what other
contacts did you have there to guide your career
later in life?
Well, of course, when I went out to the Pacific,
Roger Revelle was just coming in. In fact, I met him
in Los Angeles for the first time when he was coming
into Washington. His main interest was where he
could get a hotel room. But he and Dick Fleming met
me in Los Angeles. And then when he took over, as
I've tried to describe on the other tape, It was
perhaps one of the most important signal moves and
fortunate coincidences in the history of
oceanography.
Okay. What I'm interested in very much in here now,
knowing that when the moves were made to create the
Office of ONR with the Bureau of Ships and the
Hydrographic Office, how do you remember that
role as Navy is going to be placed into
oceanographic research?
Well, I think it became, if you'll talk to Jim
Wakelin on this, and Arthur Maxwell, and Gordon
Lill, you will get the exact information. I think
it came out of the fact that people like Wakelin,
who were on duty in the Navy, realized that there
should be an assistant secretary for R&D, and out
of that whole impetus, came the Office of Naval
Research. I have never read a history of its
formation, but I do know how the money changed from
the Bureau of Ships over to the ONR more and more and
more as ONR grew in stature and could take over more
and more of the basic research support.
At the beginning of Bikini, as Roger went out to
Bikini, He met me for one night between 11 o'clock
and 5 the next morning at Pearl Harbor. I was going
back in to sit on his defunct desk, and he urged that
I get three contracts signed, one with Scripps,
one with Woods Hole, and one with, I believe it was
Lamont at that time. And the Bureau of Ships was
still funding, doing the major funding of those
that early. Now, ONR came on. about, what was it,
46, 47? And from then on, everything gravitated.
The Bureau, of course, was really a little out of
its field. More has been hung on the necessity for
knowing about the ocean for sonar than any other
reason that you can think of. And it was Roger's own
task description that... lasted for about 15
years, about seven sentences, that created the
basis for the funding of a great deal of
oceanographic work in the Navy. Now, but you went
out to Bikini with Rebell, didn't you? He caught
me. I got on a tanker and had gone down to Bikini and
had just gotten there. I was halfway down there
when the captain called me and said, what have you
done, run off with some money or something? I said,
no, they said they want you to go back to Washington
immediately. So I saw Bikini from the air as they
sent me back by seaplane to Pearl Harbor. I never
set foot on it. You didn't see the explosion of the
devices themselves? No, I missed all the big... I
blamed somebody for that, and I looked for that
jerk for ten years, and finally I found a letter I
had written saying I'd sit anywhere they wanted
me. Okay, when you come back then, your next job is
administrative in terms of, I thought, the
hydrographic office. Is that wrong?
In the fall of 1946, I went out to Scripps in advance
because I was really not out of the Navy until
November. And thanks to Walter Monk coaching me on
the math and the help of the other students out
there, I was able to get a master's degree under the
GI Bill of Rights, graduating in 1948. John
Cochran and I got our degrees along with Woody
Jacobs getting his doctorate up at UCLA that hot
June day. I went in in July and Dick Fleming gave me a
job at the Hydrographic Office for the first two or
three years. I can never remember offhand whether
I left the, I think I left it on January the 2nd,
1951. At the Hydrographic Office, I was in charge
of oceanic development and had a part in the
developing of the instrumentation for the two
first seagoing vessels as oceanographic
vessels, the San Pablo and the Rehoboth, vessels
which Tommy Austin took to sea and did so well with
in establishing the traditions and beginning of
the oceanographic cruises of which there have
been so many since. I didn't fit in too well at the
Hydrographic Office. I was more used to the Bureau
of Ships, and when I was able to get a job over there,
I transferred. And they put me in charge of these
same contracts that had been running with the
Bureau since the war days under Dick Williams and
George Cummings. George Cummings,
incidentally, lives in Port Charlotte. And you
should get in touch with him as he was Ross and
Bennett's number two assistant and can give you
much of the administrative information you wish.
He's still alive. What did you not like about the
Hydrographic Office?
Why? I'd rather not go into that. It was about that
time I fell in love with a gallon. It didn't turn out
too well, so there were several things of that
kind. I don't blame anybody.
And how long did you stay with the Bureau of Ships?
From 1952, 51 if that's the date, until January 10,
1972. And did you see any sizable change in the
direction of the Bureau of Ships those 20 years?
Oh, yes. Immediately after the war, when I came
back there on the McKinney, this, as described in
the manual there, this great organization had
been cut down. So far cut down, George Cummings and
one lieutenant commander sat in a room at the end of
a long corridor along which there were about 10
desks, and there was just one man left of each of the
division's An important group of that was the
sonar analysis group. And Frank Andres, whose
name I've given you and address I've given you, can
give you the background on that. John Coleman of
the Academy at one time was head of that group
during the war. And they played an important part
in their requirements for information, which was
oceanographically oriented. The whole thing
always was the bureau ships was a hardware outfit.
And it was quite difficult often to make far-out
research without an absolute piece of hardware at
the end of it go. But people were generous and they
were, by using the government, my one good thing, I
think, was that I did use the government
laboratories to the maximum in establishing good
oceanographic programs in them in addition to the
university laboratories, and there's always
competition. ONR went the university route they
should, but it was my great, well, the program was a
success, was to get oceanography into about eight
government laboratories. Did you feel as if that,
possibly after World War II, that the agency with
ONR and NSL and with bureauships and hydrographic
office diversified oceanographic research too
much?
Well, since I got most of my money from ONR into the
Bureau, I always thought ONR was the daddy and the
correct one. I thought that there may have been
The most interesting thing, a division which even
comes to this day, as I understand it, due to this
poor Pascagoula move, or whatever you call it, the
Hydrographic Office resisted greatly anything
known as research. They were used to cutting and
tried, proven by the Maury approach, or the
practical approach, and although we fought to get
the control for our own government laboratories
of two oceanographic ships, it was a long time
before we could do it. the Navy felt that the Navy
Hydrographic Office, as a long-term function of
CNO, was the proper place for the operation of
those ships. So you have the dichotomy of survey
and research. Where does one begin and the other
end? Where does data gathering for understanding
and then data gathering for a hypothesis, where do
they merge? I won't say friction, but there was
stress between the Hydrographic Office's aims in
some areas and the Office of Naval Research as I saw
them.
Do you believe in the concept of directed research
or pure research? In other words, what role do you
see a research agent attached to the Navy? Should
the Navy have more specialized or
mission-oriented research? Of course, from a
funding point of view, the wonderful old thing
that used to be the theory, I say in that tape that is
in the contracts, I'm not sure it was ever written
in the contract as I think about it, but there was
this idea in the bureauships when a thing had to be
procured and you had to design it, you could go as
far back in the theory as necessary to make a good
design. And this meant eventually basic
research.
Uh-huh. The Office of Naval Research is the place
for the main aim of basic research in the Navy on
problems specified of what they see as
Navy-oriented needs. I always liked in my program
to have a leeway of 20 or 30 percent on the man who was
getting the information for the hardware to do
basic research in addition to just the applied
part. And I got some pretty good ones. Eric Baldwin
and was the first man to see the scattering layer
and understand what it was like. This ability to
look over the fence a little bit rather than at the
directed aim, I don't think you can keep people
turned on if you give them an assigned job. In other
words, you think that much of the important
research comes almost accidentally in the sense
of the discoveries? Like, for example, the deep
scattering layer.
Well,
about
basic research versus directed research.
Directed research has its place, particularly
where you have a deadline and design. and a cash
budget that you have to meet.
But there should be something more in so-called
undirected research than just data gathering.
There should be the idea that you can get the theory
better and you have some freedom of thought. There
are two kinds of research. There's a commercial
research in which you never risk a nickel unless
you can see a six-cent prop. This is, of course, the
background that the Bureau of Ships used to act on
and did act on to a large extent. And the industry
has to do that, too, because they have to make a
profit or they don't do anything. But the
undirected basic research is like water coming up
on a marsh. It runs in all directions through the
channels, but suddenly the whole level of the
water is two feet higher. And that's the only way I
can picture it. I do not think you can direct basic
research.
How much dealing did you have with private
enterprise while you were serving off and on as a
civil servant with the military?
Well, of course, in the beginning, the
bureauships had all the funding of the
institutional work. And that great institution,
the Marine Physical Laboratory, was established
by the Bureau of Ships to bridge this thing that
you're talking about right here. Admiral
Cochrane did a remarkable thing. He said, we can't
tell you how much we're going to give you, but we're
going to give you some of our budget each year. That
was the first time that this had ever been done by
the Navy, as I understand. And he said, we will
have, and as a result, they had three California
professors independently of this whole project,
paid by the University of California with status
and everything else, tenure in the whole
business. Carl Eckert was the first director,
Leonard Lieberman and Russell Raitt. And they had
a direct feed-in to the technician type of people,
the applied people, who could then take that, put
it into an instrument, improve an underwater
sound bomb, or make a thing of that kind. and a
better hydrofoam or better transducer because
they had this feed-in of the best mines which were
untrammeled by the necessity of meeting a
deadline or being directed. And when that was
taken away from the Bureau as being too basic, it
just put one layer of administration before we
could get the dope out of MPL into the Bureau
because it had to go through and off.
Did you seem to think that the relationship
between private enterprise and the military and
the universities functioned reasonably well
without a great deal of bureaucracy while you were
at the Bureau of Ships? It didn't function without
a great deal of bureaucracy. Just look at your
coordinating committees. No. Yes, I think toward
the end and in the last, in the 60s, certainly in the
60s, industry began to ride it. for all it was
worth. And I think we got a lot of beautifully
written proposals without necessarily the full
expected output. But I can't say that, really.